# Digital Democracy

## Details
- URL: calmatters.digitaldemocracy.org
- Highlight: Digital Democracy harnesses the power of big data, AI, and an easy-to-use interface to bring transparency and accountability to statewide policy choices.
- Summary: In terms of both (a) presentation of data and (b) how it brings together various data points, Digital Democracy is the most feature-rich tool we've evaluated. They were one of the earliest machine-learning tools dedicated to news discovery to launch and one result is wide recognition. Based on our research at the Product & AI Studio and with our larger community, we found that newsrooms experimenting with AI are deeply impressed with Digital Democracy and it has become a defacto standard by which most other tools in this space are measured. 

However, it is currently only available for two state legislatures – California and Hawaii – and bringing this level of effort to other states will not be an easy task.

## What is this for?
The public-facing website for Digital Democracy is a comprehensive guide to nearly every quantifiable event that is happening in the California and Hawaii state legislatures. It does an excellent job at merging and cross-referencing multiple datasets. This tool can combine a single legislator’s voting record with census data about their district, then layer those findings with relevant campaign contributions, bills and committee activities, along with videos to watch their comments.

Navigating the vast amount of information begins with the following three groupings, and the data is combined and well-presented across each: 
- Issues (e.g. education, health, etc.)
- Directories (e.g. hearings, bills, etc.)
- Legislators

The same data that powers the public-facing website is also used to generate a second product, available only to newsrooms, called Tipsheets. It generates one-page summaries with story ideas for reporters.

### How is AI used?
Most of what publicly appears on the Digital Democracy website has not been created by AI. The database is a collection of spoken and written data, financial information and legislative actions including voting records. Digital Democracy then uses technology and human judgment to discern how these data points should be recorded and linked to other records.

Transcripts are initially generated by AI, followed by human reviews and edits to confirm accuracy. In the newsroom-only tool, Tipsheets, the AI constantly scans the database for new transcripts of public meetings and to generate story ideas from those events. The AI used is proprietary, and it links to its original sources in the public documents.

### What makes it different from other tools?
There is a high level of editorial output included in Digital Democracy. The project is done in collaboration with CalMatters, the nonprofit newsroom focused on California’s state government, and is an extension of their main news site. Digital Democracy isn’t much of an AI tool; it is a “CalMatters project using technology and data to increase transparency, accountability and understanding about California state legislators and the decisions they make about state policy.”

Tipsheets is an AI tool for journalists, and it’s intended for any local journalist “who doesn’t really know the legislature really well and doesn't have a lot of time” and can look “see a story that they can turn around in a couple of hours.”

### Pros
- All of the data is publicly available, but what Digital Democracy does is make that data easily accessible all in one place. The editorial success of Digital Democracy is with how they have organized the data together into one professionally built website. They explain their methodology here.

### Cons
- It is currently limited to the California and Hawaii state legislatures.
- It cannot track unofficial actions outside the policy-making process, like comments made during a media appearance. 

## Newsroom clients
Currently in use by CalMatters, who helped develop it, and Honolulu Civil Beat.

## Note
The American Journalism Project works with CalMatters but does not have a formal partnership with Digital Democracy. This snapshot is based on available public and submitted information to support independent newsroom evaluation.